The Fracton Gauge Principle
Michael Pretko
Department of Physics and Center for Theory of Quantum Matter
University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309
(Dated: May 30, 2019)
A powerful mechanism for constructing gauge theories is to start from a theory with a global
symmetry, then apply the “gauge principle,” which demands that this symmetry hold locally. For
example, the global phase rotation of a system of conserved charges can be promoted to a local phase
rotation by coupling to an ordinary U(1) vector gauge ﬁeld. More recently, a class of particles has
been studied featuring not only charge conservation, but also conservation of higher moments, such
as dipole moment, which leads to severe restrictions on the mobility of charges. These particles,
called fractons, are known to be intimately connected to symmetric tensor gauge ﬁelds. In this
work, we show how to derive such tensor gauge theories by applying the gauge principle to a theory
of ungauged fractons. We begin by formulating a ﬁeld theory for ungauged fractons exhibiting
global conservation of charge and dipole moment. We show that such fracton ﬁeld theories have a
characteristic non-Gaussian form, reﬂecting the fact that fractons intrinsically interact with each
other even in the absence of a mediating gauge ﬁeld. We then promote the global higher moment
conservation laws to local ones, which requires the introduction of a symmetric tensor gauge ﬁeld.
Finally, we extend these arguments to other types of subdimensional particles besides fractons. This
work oﬀers a possible route to the formulation of non-abelian fracton theories.
Introduction. The concept of a gauge theory is one
of the most important elements of the toolbox of mod-
ern theoretical physics, describing phenomena ranging
from the fundamental particles of the Standard Model
to topological phases of matter in solid state systems.
Gauge theories are diﬀerent from more conventional ﬁeld
theories, in that they have an enormously large degree
of symmetry, partially due to a signiﬁcant redundancy
in the description of physical states. Speciﬁcally, gauge
theories have local symmetries, involving independent
symmetry transformations at each point in spacetime, as
opposed to the global symmetry transformations encoun-
tered in ungauged ﬁeld theories. A particularly elegant
and powerful approach to constructing gauge theories is
to start from an ungauged theory, with some global sym-
metry, then make the demand that this symmetry should
continue to hold locally. Philosophically, the notion that
a global symmetry should continue to hold at the local
level is known as the “gauge principle.” 1
As a concrete example, consider a system of conserved
particles, described by a ﬁeld Φ. Particle number con-
servation will be encoded in the theory in the form of
invariance of the action under a global phase rotation:
Φ→eiαΦ (1)
for constant α. In order to construct a gauge theory, we
now demand that the theory should be invariant under
independent phase rotations at each point in spacetime,
i.e. under Φ→ eiα(x,t)Φ for a function α(x,t ) with ar-
bitrary spacetime dependence. Adding such spacetime
dependence creates problems for derivative operators in
the theory, which no longer transform covariantly:
∂µΦ→eiα(∂µ +i∂µα)Φ (2)
In order to restore gauge-covariance and thereby obtain
a gauge-invariant action, we must introduce a gauge ﬁeld
to absorb the non-covariant piece of this transformation.
We do this by deﬁning a gauge-covariant derivative as:
DµΦ = (∂µ−iAµ)Φ→eiαDµΦ (3)
where the gauge ﬁeld Aµ must transform as Aµ→Aµ +
∂µα. We can then easily write down a gauge-invariant
Lagrangian for the theory in terms of the gauge covariant
derivative and ﬁeld invariants of the gauge ﬁeld itself:
L =Lm[Φ,D Φ,D 2Φ,... ] +FµνFµν (4)
where the ﬁrst term describes matter and its interaction
with the gauge ﬁeld, while Fµν = ∂µAν−∂νAµ is the
standard ﬁeld strength tensor of a U(1) gauge ﬁeld, de-
scribing the dynamics of a photon mode. In this way,
promoting the phase rotation of a set of conserved par-
ticles from a global to a local symmetry has led to the
familiar Maxwell gauge theory.
Taking other types of global symmetries and “gaug-
ing” them will result in other types of gauge theories. For
example, gauging a global symmetry described by a non-
abelian Lie group will lead to a Yang-Mills theory. 1 As
another example, gauging a symmetry protected topo-
logical (SPT) phase protected by groupG will result in a
topologically ordered phase with gauge group G.2 These
types of gauging procedures are now well-established. In
recent years, however, a new set of unfamiliar symme-
tries and conservation laws has come to light, pertaining
to higher charge moments. These new conservation laws
are manifested in systems of particles known as fractons,
which have severely restricted mobility tracing directly
to conservation of quantities such as dipole moment. 3
(We refer the reader to a recent review4 for a broad per-
spective on fractons, and to selected literature 3,5–26 for
further details.) While global charge conservation is as-
sociated with a global phase rotation, Φ →eiαΦ, global
arXiv:1807.11479v3  [cond-mat.str-el]  29 May 2019
2
dipole conservation is associated with a linearly varying
phase rotation, Φ→ei⃗λ·⃗ xΦ. This symmetry transforma-
tion is neither a gauge symmetry nor one of the recently
discussed subsystem symmetries.8,27,28 (Note that a sub-
system symmetry is equivalent to an inﬁnite number of
higher moment symmetries, which provide the more gen-
eral framework.) It is not immediately clear what sort of
theory will result from “gauging” such a set of symme-
tries and conservation laws. A signiﬁcant clue is provided
by fracton phases in certain spin, Majorana, and quan-
tum rotor systems3,6–11, which are often described in the
language of tensor gauge theories, as opposed to the more
familiar vector gauge ﬁelds obtained from gauging con-
ventional symmetries. In this work, we will demonstrate
explicitly how tensor gauge ﬁelds arise via application of
the gauge principle to a system of fractons, promoting
global higher moment conservation laws and symmetries
to local ones. This work serves as a useful complement to
the existing literature on gauging subsystem symmetries
to obtain discrete fracton models. 8,10–12,25,27,29,30
In order to study gauging a system of fractons, it is
ﬁrst necessary to have a ﬁeld theory for ungauged U(1)
fractons, which has not yet been studied in the fracton
literature. (Earlier work 29 has studied a ﬁeld theory for
a condensate of ungauged fractons, though as we will
discuss, such ﬁeld theories cannot describe the mobil-
ity restrictions of uncondensed fractons.) We therefore
begin by formulating a ﬁeld-theoretic description of un-
gauged fractons exhibiting global conservation of both
charge and dipole moment. We show that there is gener-
ically no nontrivial Gaussian action (i.e. quadratic in the
fracton ﬁelds) with these properties. Rather, the natural
ﬁeld theory for the simplest fracton system is quartic in
the fracton ﬁelds. Similarly, ﬁeld theories for fracton sys-
tems conserving even higher moments will feature even
higher powers of the ﬁelds in the action. This type of
non-Gaussian behavior has already been found by Slagle
and Kim in the context of a gauge theory for the “X-
cube” fracton model. 12 This non-Gaussian nature of the
ﬁeld theory reﬂects the fact that fractons necessarily in-
teract with each other even in the absence of a mediating
gauge ﬁeld, as we will review. In this sense, there is no
true “non-interacting” theory of fractons.
With the ungauged theory in hand, we then proceed
to apply the gauge principle, demanding that the theory
be invariant under local symmetry transformations. We
show that, for a theory conserving charge and dipole mo-
ment, the gauge principle demands coupling to a rank-
two symmetric tensor gauge ﬁeld, consistent with pre-
viously studied fracton phases. 3 Similarly, local conser-
vation of higher charge moments will require the intro-
duction of even higher rank tensor gauge ﬁelds. In this
way, the theory of symmetric tensor gauge ﬁelds can be
derived directly from a gauge principle, in close anal-
ogy with more conventional gauge theories. Finally, we
consider extensions of this logic to other types of sub-
dimensional particles besides fractons, which also yield
tensor gauge theories upon application of the gauge prin-
ciple. This work opens a possible door to investigations
of non-abelian fracton theories, via gauging non-abelian
analogues of higher moment symmetries.
Ungauged Fracton Field Theory . We begin by con-
structing a ﬁeld theory for ungauged fractons, focusing
on the simplest type: U(1) fractons exhibiting conserva-
tion of both charge and dipole moment. We describe the
fractons by a matter ﬁeld Φ along with its corresponding
charge density operator,ρ = Φ†Φ. We now wish to write
down an action for this theory which is consistent with
global conservation of charge and dipole moment. Since
the charge density ρ generates rotations of the phase of
Φ, the demand that the action respect charge conser-
vation (
∫
ddxρ = constant) requires invariance of the
action under the global transformation:
Φ→eiαΦ (5)
for constant α. We also demand that the theory obeys
conservation of dipole moment,
∫
ddx (ρ⃗ x) = constant,
which requires an additional invariance under:
Φ→ei⃗λ·⃗ xΦ (6)
for constant vector ⃗λ. In other words, the phase of the
ﬁeld can now change by a linear function, instead of sim-
ply by a global constant, as in the case of ordinary con-
served charges. For convenience, we combine both types
of transformations into the form:
Φ→eiα(x)Φ (7)
where, in the present context, α(x) is restricted to be a
linear function.
In order to construct an action with the desired sym-
metries, we look for operatorsO which transform covari-
antly under the phase rotation,O→einαO for integern.
For ordinary globally conserved charges, whereα(x) is a
constant, the ﬁeld Φ and all of its derivatives and pow-
ers transform covariantly. In the present case, however,
the linear behavior of α(x) restricts the set of covariant
operators involving spatial derivatives. While the ﬁeld
Φ itself is still covariant, it can readily be checked that
any number of derivatives acting on a single power of Φ
will not transform covariantly. Rather, the lowest-order
covariant derivative operator contains two factors of Φ,
taking the form:
Φ∂i∂jΦ−∂iΦ∂jΦ (8)
Under a generic transformation Φ →eiα(x)Φ, this oper-
ator transforms into:
ei2α
(
Φ∂i∂jΦ−∂iΦ∂jΦ
+i∂iαΦ∂jΦ +i∂jαΦ∂iΦ− (∂iα∂jα−i∂i∂jα)Φ2
−i∂iαΦ∂jΦ−i∂jαΦ∂iΦ +∂iα∂jαΦ2
)
=ei2α
(
Φ∂i∂jΦ−∂iΦ∂jΦ + (i∂i∂jα)Φ2
)
(9)
3
FIG. 1. Theories with only charge conservation have local
dipole creation operators, which lead to quadratic terms in
the continuum ﬁeld theory limit. In contrast, a theory with
dipole moment conservation has no such dipole creation op-
erators. In this case, the smallest creation operators are
quadrupolar, leading to quartic terms in the ﬁeld theory.
For the phase rotations under consideration, where α(x)
is a linear function, we have ∂i∂jα = 0, such that:
Φ∂i∂jΦ−∂iΦ∂jΦ→ei2α(Φ∂i∂jΦ−∂iΦ∂jΦ) (10)
It is then straightforward to construct a Lagrangian re-
specting the charge and dipole conservation laws. To
lowest order, this Lagrangian takes the form:
L =|∂tΦ|2−m2|Φ|2−λ|Φ∂i∂jΦ−∂iΦ∂jΦ|2
−λ′Φ∗2(Φ∂2Φ−∂iΦ∂iΦ)
(11)
where we have freely added a term with a single time
derivative and a mass term, which have no interplay with
the spatially dependent phase rotation. The constants λ
and λ′ are arbitrary couplings. Note that, while the λ′
term contains fewer derivatives than the λ term, it only
contains diagonal second derivatives ( e.g. ∂2
x, but not
∂x∂y), indicating that this term only describes longitudi-
nal motion of dipoles. As such, it is necessary to keep the
λ term in order to correctly describe transverse motion
of dipoles. Also note that we have here assumed rota-
tional invariance, for simplicity. Additional anisotropic
terms may arise for certain lattice symmetries.
Equation 11 represents a ﬁeld theory for ungauged
fractons, respecting global conservation of both charge
and dipole moment. Importantly, this lowest-order non-
trivial action is already non-Gaussian before coupling to
any gauge ﬁeld, containing fourth powers of Φ in the ac-
tion. This non-Gaussian behavior could have been antic-
ipated based on microscopic considerations. For a theory
of ordinary conserved charges, local charge creation oper-
ators take the form of microscopic dipoles, Φ†(x+1)Φ(x),
which lead to a quadratic term in the action upon Tay-
lor expansion. Meanwhile, in a theory with conserved
dipole moment, the local charge creation operators take
the form of microscopic quadrupoles, as depicted in Fig-
ure 1, leading to quartic terms upon Taylor expansion.
Similarly, a theory with conserved quadrupole moment
would only have microscopic octupole operators, leading
to an action which is octic in the fracton ﬁeld. This logic
will extend to conservation laws of any higher moment.
The non-Gaussian nature of the fracton action is also
to be expected, since fractons have an intrinsic ability to
FIG. 2. Fractons can interact via the exchange of virtual
dipoles, allowing two fractons to “push oﬀ” of each other.
interact with each other, even in the absence of a medi-
ating gauge ﬁeld. While a fracton cannot move by itself,
a fracton is capable of limited mobility by “pushing oﬀ”
other fractons in the system via the following process:
A fracton moves in one direction by emitting a dipole in
the opposite direction, which then propagates to and is
absorbed by a second fracton, as depicted in Figure 2.
Such processes, which lead to a “gravitational” attrac-
tion between fractons 14, are neatly captured by the two
quartic terms in the fracton action.
We mention in passing that, to describe a symme-
try broken system, such that Φ( x,t ) = Φ 0eiθ(x,t) for
constant Φ 0 and dynamical phase θ, the Lagrangian of
Equation 11 will simplify to an ordinary Gaussian ﬁeld
theory on the phaseθ, which transforms asθ→θ +α(x)
under the symmetries. The resulting action takes the
form:
L = 1
2(∂tθ)2− K
2 (∂i∂jθ)2 (12)
for some parameter K. For such symmetry broken
phases, where the mobility restrictions have been re-
laxed, the non-Gaussian nature of the original action
is unimportant. However, for describing a symmetric
system with immobile gapped fractons, one must retain
the full quartic structure of the ﬁeld theory. Note that,
if (∂i∂jθ)2 is replaced by cos( ∂i∂jθ) in the above La-
grangian, then accessing the uncondensed phase becomes
possible. However, such cosine terms inherently require
a choice of underlying lattice and do not represent a
true continuum ﬁeld theory. Rather, the quartic action
of Equation 11 must be used for a completely continuum
description of the fracton phase.
Application of the Gauge Principle . In the previous
section, we derived a fracton ﬁeld theory which is invari-
ant under Φ→eiα(x)Φ for linear functionsα(x), thereby
respecting global conservation of charge and dipole mo-
ment. We now wish to apply the gauge principle and
demand that the theory have a local symmetry, such
that α(x) is an arbitrary function of x. From the form
of the transformation seen in Equation 9, it is easy to
see that we can construct a gauge-covariant object of the
form:
Φ∂i∂jΦ−∂iΦ∂jΦ−iAijΦ2 (13)
4
if we have the transformation rules:
Φ→eiαΦ (14)
Aij→Aij +∂i∂jα (15)
For notational simplicity, we deﬁne a gauge-covariant
second derivative operator Dij acting on Φ 2 as follows:
DijΦ2 = Φ∂i∂jΦ−∂iΦ∂jΦ−iAijΦ2 (16)
More properly, we should deﬁne Dij as a bilinear op-
erator acting on two functions Φ and Ψ as Dij[Φ, Ψ] =
Φ∂i∂jΨ−∂iΦ∂jΨ−iAijΦΨ, where both ﬁelds must have
the same charge under the gauge transformation in or-
der for the operator to be covariant. (Note that, in
the presence of multiple charged ﬁelds, only the total
charge and dipole moment of the system will be con-
served, not for each ﬁeld separately.) For present pur-
poses, however, we will only need the “diagonal” ele-
ment, DijΦ2≡ Dij[Φ, Φ]. We can also allow α to have
arbitrary time dependence if we introduce the gauge-
covariant time derivative:
DtΦ = (∂t−iφ)Φ (17)
where the ﬁeld φ transforms as:
φ→φ +∂tα (18)
behaving analogously to a “timelike” component of the
gauge ﬁeld. We can also construct gauge-invariant quan-
tities involving only the gauge ﬁelds, analogous to the
electric and magnetic ﬁelds of ordinary U(1) gauge the-
ory. For example, in three spatial dimensions these take
the formEij =∂tAij−∂i∂jφ andBij =ϵikℓ∂kAℓ
j. Mak-
ing use of these quantities, the Lagrangian for the gauged
theory, to lowest order in derivatives, must take the form:
L =|DtΦ|2−m2|Φ|2−λ|DijΦ2|2−λ′(Φ∗2Di
iΦ2 + c.c.)
−λ′ +EijEij−BijBij
(19)
Note the need for the complex conjugate (c.c.) in the λ′
term, which is not automatically real-valued. The gauge
ﬁeld sector of this Lagrangian is exactly of the form stud-
ied in previous works on fracton tensor gauge theories,
speciﬁcally that of the scalar charge theory studied in
Reference 3. However, we now have an explicit coupling
to matter ﬁelds which accounts for the higher moment
conservation laws of fractons. Through similar applica-
tion of the gauge principle to theories with even higher
conserved moments, we could also derive gauge theories
featuring tensor gauge ﬁelds of rank higher than two,
which we do not carry through here.
Extensions to Other Subdimensional Particles . We
now wish to extend these ideas to other types of subdi-
mensional particles, which have restricted mobility only
in certain directions. As a concrete example, we will
focus on one-dimensional particles, restricted to mo-
tion along a line. A similar analysis will hold for two-
dimensional particles. We focus on the simplest type of
one-dimensional particles, which carry a vector-valued
charge⃗ ρ. We take these vector charges to exhibit global
conservation of both charge (
∫
ddx⃗ ρ= constant) and
angular charge moment (
∫
ddx (⃗ ρ×⃗ x) = constant). We
describe these vector particles via a ﬁeld Φ i correspond-
ing to each component of the charge vector, such that
ρi = Φ†
iΦi, where no summation overi is implied. In this
section alone, all summations will be indicated explicitly.
Conservation of vector charge implies that the action
for the theory should be invariant under independent
phase rotations on each component of the ﬁeld:
Φi→eiαiΦi (20)
for constant vectorαi, where this equation is to be inter-
preted component-wise in some particular basis. Mean-
while, the angular moment conservation law implies in-
variance under a second set of transformations:
Φi→ei ∑
jkϵijkλjxkΦi (21)
for constant vector λj. For convenience, we combine
these transformations as:
Φi→eiαi(x)Φi (22)
where for present purposes we have αi(x) = α0,i +∑
jkϵijkλjxk for constants α0,i and λ. Note that the
ﬁeld Φi does not transform nicely under rotations ( i.e.
it is not a valid vector). Nevertheless, at the end of the
day, we will obtain a true tensor gauge ﬁeld upon apply-
ing the gauge principle. The loss of manifest rotational
invariance introduced by Φi may simply be a mathemat-
ical artifact. It remains an open problem whether this
theory can be rewritten in a manifestly rotationally in-
variant way.
We now wish to construct an invariant action by iden-
tifying the covariant operators in this theory. As usual,
operators without derivatives are automatically covari-
ant. Meanwhile, a derivative on Φ i transforms as:
∂iΦj→eiαj(∂i +i∂iαj)Φj =eiαj(∂i +i
∑
k
ϵikjλk)Φj
(23)
We see that, at the level of single-ﬁeld derivative opera-
tors, we have covariance only when i =j, giving us the
covariant longitudinal derivative operators:
∂iΦi→eiαi∂iΦi (24)
for each component i. To include transverse derivatives
in the action, however, we must once again proceed to
two-ﬁeld operators. We can easily construct a covariant
operator as follows:
Φi∂iΦj + Φj∂jΦi→
ei(αi+αj )
(
Φi∂iΦj + Φj∂jΦi +i(∂iαj +∂jαi)ΦiΦj
)
(25)
5
Takingαi(x) =α0,i +∑
jkϵijkλjxk, the last term above
vanishes, leaving us with:
Φi∂iΦj + Φj∂jΦi→ei(αi+αj )
(
Φi∂iΦj + Φj∂jΦi
)
(26)
We can now write down a Lagrangian respecting vector
charge and angular moment conservation as a function
of these covariant operators:
L[Φi,∂iΦi, Φi∂iΦj + Φj∂jΦi] (27)
where the lowest order term involving transverse spatial
derivatives is quartic in the ﬁelds.
Starting from this theory with global conservation
laws, we can now apply the gauge principle, giving
αi(x,t ) arbitrary spacetime dependence, to promote the
conservation laws to local ones. In this case, the gauge-
covariant operators become:
Φi∂iΦj + Φj∂jΦi−iAijΦiΦj (28)
(∂i−iAii)Φi (29)
DtΦi = (∂t−iφi)Φi (30)
where we have introduced a tensor gauge ﬁeld which
transforms as:
Aij→Aij +∂iαj +∂jαi (31)
φi→φi +∂tαi (32)
The corresponding action can be written down directly
from Equation 27 by replacing all derivative operators
with their gauge-covariant versions, plus adding the ap-
propriate ﬁeld invariants. The resulting gauge theory
has exactly the structure of the vector charge theory dis-
cussed in Reference 3. In this way, tensor gauge theories
of subdimensional particles can be derived from a gauge
principle, just like those for fractons.
Conclusions. In this work, we applied the “gauge prin-
ciple” (i.e. promotion of a global symmetry to a local
symmetry) to a system of fractons. We have shown how
to formulate ﬁeld theories of ungauged fractons, obey-
ing global conservation of higher charge moments. These
ﬁeld theories are generically non-Gaussian, reﬂecting the
intrinsic ability of fractons to interact without the need
for a mediating gauge ﬁeld. We then promoted the global
higher moment conservation laws to local ones, which we
have shown requires coupling the theory to a symmetric
tensor gauge ﬁeld. In this way, the theory of symmetric
tensor gauge ﬁelds arises from a gauge principle in much
the same way as an ordinary vector gauge ﬁeld. We also
discussed extensions of this logic to other types of subdi-
mensional particles besides fractons, which obey similar
gauge principles.
This work has the potential to open several new direc-
tions in fracton physics. For example, by considering a
fracton ﬁeld transforming under a nonabelian Lie group,
is it possible to construct a nonabelian tensor gauge the-
ory? And what would the properties be of such a system?
Also, with an explicit ﬁeld theory for fractons, is it now
possible to develop more powerful technical tools to an-
alyze fracton theories, such as an analogue of Feynman
diagrams? By discretizing the derivatives, can we write
fracton theories on arbitrary lattices? How do these ﬁeld
theories need to be modiﬁed to apply to “type-II” U(1)
fractons, featuring no mobile bound states? 31 Does this
ﬁeld theory shed any light on the theory of elasticity
and its associated phase transitions? 22,23,32,33 There are
many exciting questions remaining to be answered.
Acknowledgments. I acknowledge useful conversations
with Wojciech de Roeck, Mike Hermele, Shriya Pai,
Leo Radzihovsky, Rahul Nandkishore, Han Ma, Abhi-
nav Prem, and Kevin Slagle. I also thank Juven Wang
for pointing out some typos in a previous version of this
manuscript. This work is supported partially by NSF
Grant 1734006, by a Simons Investigator Award to Leo
Radzihovsky, and by the Foundational Questions Insti-
tute (fqxi.org; grant no. FQXi-RFP-1617) through their
fund at the Silicon Valley Community Foundation.
1 G. ’t Hooft, Under the Spell of the Gauge Principle . World
Scientiﬁc Publishing Company (1994)
2 M. Levin and Z.-C. Gu, Braiding statistics approach to
symmetry-protected topological phases. Phys. Rev. B 86,
115109 (2012), arXiv:1202.3120v2
3 M. Pretko, Subdimensional particle structure of higher
rank U(1) spin liquids . Phys. Rev. B 95, 115139 (2017),
arXiv:1604.05329v3
4 R. M. Nandkishore and M. Hermele, Fractons.
arXiv:1803.11196 (2018)
5 C. Chamon, Quantum glassiness in strongly correlated
clean systems: An example of topological overprotec-
tion. Phys. Rev. Lett. 94 040402 (2005), arXiv:cond-
mat/0404182v2
6 J. Haah, Local stabilizer codes in three dimensions without
string logical operators. Phys. Rev. A 83, 042330 (2011),
arXiv:1101.1962v2
7 S. Vijay, J. Haah, L. Fu,A new kind of topological quantum
order: A dimensional hierarchy of quasiparticles built from
stationary excitations . Phys. Rev. B 92, 235136 (2015),
arXiv:1505.02576
8 S. Vijay, J. Haah, L. Fu, Fracton topological order, gen-
eralized lattice gauge theory and duality . Phys. Rev. B 94,
235157 (2016), arXiv:1603.04442
6
9 M. Pretko, Generalized electromagnetism of subdimen-
sional particles . Phys. Rev. B 96, 035119 (2017),
arXiv:1606.08857v2
10 H. Ma, M. Hermele, and X. Chen, Fracton topological or-
der from Higgs and partial conﬁnement mechanisms of
rank-two gauge theory. arXiv:1802.10108 (2018)
11 D. Bulmash and M. Barkeshli, The Higgs mechanism in
higher-rank symmetric U(1) gauge theories. Phys. Rev. B
97, 235112 (2018), arXiv:1802.10099v2
12 K. Slagle and Y. B. Kim, Quantum ﬁeld theory of X-cube
fracton topological order and robust degeneracy from geom-
etry. Phys. Rev. B 96, 195139 (2017), arXiv:1708.04619v3
13 W. Shirley, K. Slagle, Z. Wang, and X. Chen,
Fracton models on general three-dimensional manifolds .
arXiv:1712.05892 (2017)
14 M. Pretko, Emergent gravity of fractons: Mach’s
principle revisited . Phys. Rev. D 96, 024051 (2017),
arXiv:1702.07613v3
15 H. Yan, Fracton topological order and holography .
arXiv:1807.05942 (2018)
16 A. Prem, M. Pretko, and R. Nandkishore, Emergent
phases of fractonic matter . Phys. Rev. B 97, 085116
(2018), arXiv:1709.09673
17 A. Prem, J. Haah, R. Nandkishore, Glassy quantum dy-
namics in translation invariant fracton models. Phys. Rev.
B 95, 155133 (2017), arXiv:1702.02952
18 H. Ma, E. Lake, X. Chen, M. Hermele, Fracton topological
order via coupled layers . Phys. Rev. B 95, 245126 (2017),
arXiv:1701.00747v2
19 S. Vijay, Isotropic layer construction and phase diagram
for fracton topological phases. arXiv:1701.00762 (2017)
20 H. Ma, A. T. Schmitz, S. A. Parameswaran, M. Hermele,
and R. M. Nandkishore, Topological entanglement entropy
of fracton stabilizer codes. Phys. Rev. B 97, 125101 (2018),
arXiv:1710.01744v3
21 A. T. Schmitz, H. Ma, R. M. Nandkishore, and S.
A. Parameswaran, Recoverable information and emergent
conservation laws in fracton stabilizer codes. Phys. Rev. B
97, 134426 (2018), arXiv:1712.02375v3
22 M. Pretko and L. Radzihovsky, Fracton-elasticity duality.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 120, 195301 (2018), arXiv:1711.11044
23 S. Pai and M. Pretko, Fractonic line excitations: An in-
road from 3d elasticity theory . Phys. Rev. B 97, 235102
(2018), arXiv:1804.01536
24 H. Ma and M. Pretko, Higher Rank deconﬁned
quantum criticality and the exciton Bose condensate .
arXiv:1803.04980 (2018)
25 T. Devakul, Y. You, F. J. Burnell, and S. L. Sondhi, Frac-
tal symmetric phases of matter . arXiv:1805.04097 (2018)
26 S. Pai, M. Pretko, and R. M. Nandkishore, Localization in
fractonic random circuits. arXiv:1807.09776 (2018)
27 D. J. Williamson, Fractal symmetries: Ungauging
the cubic code . Phys. Rev. B 94, 155128 (2016),
arXiv:1603.05182v3
28 Y. You, T. Devakul, F. J. Burnell, and S. L. Sondhi, Sub-
system symmetry protected topological order. Phys. Rev. B
98, 035112 (2018), arXiv:1803.02369
29 W. Shirley, K. Slagle, and X. Chen, Foliated fracton or-
der from gauging subsystem symmetries. arXiv:1806.08679
(2018)
30 A. Kubica and B. Yoshida, Ungauging quantum error-
correcting codes. arXiv:1805:01836 (2018)
31 D. Bulmash and M. Barkeshli, Generalized U(1) gauge
ﬁeld theories and fractal dynamics . arXiv:1806.01855
(2018)
32 A. Gromov, Fractional topological elasticity and fracton
order. arXiv:1712.06600 (2017)
33 M. Pretko and L. Radzihovsky,Symmetry enriched fracton
phases from supersolid duality . arXiv:1808.05616 (2018)
34 A. Kumar and A. C. Potter, Symmetry enforced frac-
tonicity and 2d quantum crystal melting. arXiv:1808.05621
(2018)